MTA-7134-LLM-Proxy-Transaction-Logging-Schema-Audit-Trail-Integration (#379)
migtools/mta-documentation: docs/topics/developer-lightspeed/proc_auditing-llm-proxy-transactions.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * docs/developer-lightspeed-guide/master.adoc

:_template-generated: 2026-07-05

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT

[id="monitoring-llm-proxy-interactions_{context}"]
= LLM proxy interaction monitoring

[role="_abstract"]

> The {mta-dl-plugin} LLM proxy acts as a single, administrator-controlled access point between developers and external large language model (LLM) providers. Understanding its data handling and logging behavior is important for organizations with AI system governance requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {mta-dl-plugin} LLM proxy acts as a single, administrator-controlled access point between developers and external large language model (LLM) providers. Understanding its data handling and logging behavior is important for organizations with artificial intelligence (AI) system governance requirements.
```

[NOTE]
====

> Red{nbsp}Hat plans to provide structured per-request audit logging and SIEM forwarding. The current release emits only standard server logs. For more information, see xref:llm-proxy-future-logging_{context}[Planned audit logging capabilities].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Red{nbsp}Hat plans to provide structured per-request audit logging and security incident and event management (SIEM) forwarding. The current release generates only standard server logs. For more information, see xref:llm-proxy-future-logging_{context}[Planned audit logging capabilities].
```
Just a suggestion here.

> Red{nbsp}Hat plans to provide structured per-request audit logging and security incident and event management (SIEM) forwarding. The current release generates only standard server logs. For more information, see xref:llm-proxy-future-logging_{context}[Planned audit logging capabilities].

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit skeptical regarding "Red{nbsp}Hat plans". We're advised not to talk about future plans: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=information-claims-recommendations.

====

[id="llm-proxy-data-handling_{context}"]
== LLM proxy request and data handling

> The LLM proxy is built on llama-stack and runs as a dedicated pod within the MTA namespace. It provides the following controls:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LLM proxy is built on llama-stack and runs as a dedicated pod within the {ProductShortName} namespace. It provides the following controls:
```

> Credential isolation:: LLM provider API keys are stored in a Kubernetes secret and never distributed to client applications. Only the proxy pod reads these credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Credential isolation:: LLM provider application programming interface (API) keys are stored in a Kubernetes secret and never distributed to client applications. Only the proxy pod reads these credentials.
```

> JWT-based authentication:: When authentication is enabled, the proxy validates every incoming request against the Hub's Keycloak instance by using its JWKS endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JWT-based authentication:: When authentication is enabled, the proxy validates every incoming JSON web token (JWT) request against the Hub's Keycloak instance by using its `JWKS` endpoint:
```

> JWT-based authentication:: When authentication is enabled, the proxy validates every incoming request against the Hub's Keycloak instance by using its JWKS endpoint:

Reviewer 3: The dependency for Keycloak is being removed in MTA 8.2. It would be more accurate to say something like "the Hub's OIDC provider".

Author: I am trying to get this into 8.1 docs

+
[subs="+quotes"]
----
https://__<keycloak>__/realms/__<realm>__/protocol/openid-connect/certs
----
+
Requests that fail validation are rejected with a `401` or `403` response before they reach the LLM provider.

Header redaction:: Authorization headers and other sensitive fields are redacted from proxy logs.

> Data persistence:: LLM interactions are stored in the llamastack PostgreSQL database in the following tables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data persistence:: LLM interactions are stored in the llama-stack PostgreSQL database in the following tables:
```
Could you please weigh in on references to Llama Stack? It seems the project has been rebranded to [Open GenAI Stack (OGX)](https://github.com/ogx-ai/ogx)?

+
* `llm_proxy_inference_store`: Individual inference records
* `llm_proxy_conversations`: Conversation context records

[NOTE]
====

> As of MTA 8.2, OIDC user identity is terminated at the Hub and is not passed to or stored by the proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of {ProductShortName} 8.2, OpenID Connect (OIDC) user identity is terminated at the Hub and is not passed to or stored by the proxy.
```

====

[id="llm-proxy-log-access_{context}"]

> == Accessing LLM proxy pod logs

Reviewer 2: This might be a problem. This part should be a procedure module. Otherwise, I'm afraid, it might cause migration issues.

> The proxy writes standard server output to stdout. You can access these logs by using the `oc logs` command. The logs are useful for diagnosing connectivity issues and errors between the proxy and the LLM provider.

Reviewer 2: Just to make it compliant with procedure module's short description requirements
```suggestion
To diagnose connectivity errors between the proxy and the LLM provider, use the `oc logs` command. The proxy writes standard server output to stdout.
```

[NOTE]
====
Current proxy logs are unstructured uvicorn server output. Each entry contains the HTTP method, request path, and status code, or a Python exception traceback for error conditions. They do not contain structured per-transaction records or user identity information.
====

.Prerequisites

> * You have installed the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You have installed the {ocp-short} {CLIName} (`oc`).
```

> ====

Reviewer 2: I would maybe turn this one into plain text. When migrated to AEM, this part will be placed between Prerequisites and Procedure, which will make it look strange :D 
```suggestion
Current proxy logs are unstructured uvicorn server output. Each entry contains the HTTP method, request path, and status code, or a Python exception traceback for error conditions. They do not contain structured per-transaction records or user identity information.
```

> * You are logged in to the cluster with the `cluster-admin` role or an equivalent role that grants read access to pods in the MTA namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You are logged in to the cluster with the `cluster-admin` role or an equivalent role that grants read access to pods in the {ProductShortName} namespace.
```

.Procedure

. Identify the proxy pod name:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ *oc get pods -n __<mta_namespace>__ | grep proxy*
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
mta-ui-mta-proxy-7d6f9b8c4-xk2pq   1/1   Running   0   2d
----

. Stream the current log output from the proxy pod:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ *oc logs -f __<proxy_pod_name>__ -n __<mta_namespace>__*
----
+

> .Example output

Reviewer 2: I think we can drop this part. Up to you, though :D I'm not sure whether it might cause migration issues..
```suggestion
```

[source,terminal]
----
INFO:     10.128.2.14:52310 - "POST /v1/chat/completions HTTP/1.1" 200 OK
INFO:     10.128.2.14:52311 - "POST /v1/chat/completions HTTP/1.1" 503 Service Unavailable
----

. To retrieve logs from a previous (terminated) proxy pod, add the `--previous` flag:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ *oc logs --previous __<proxy_pod_name>__ -n __<mta_namespace>__*
----

[id="llm-proxy-future-logging_{context}"]

> == Planned audit logging capabilities

Reviewer 2: Same here regarding mentioning plans: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=information-claims-recommendations

+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ *oc logs -f __<proxy_pod_name>__ -n __<mta_namespace>__*
----
+
.Example output
[source,terminal]
----
INFO:     10.128.2.14:52310 - "POST /v1/chat/completions HTTP/1.1" 200 OK
INFO:     10.128.2.14:52311 - "POST /v1/chat/completions HTTP/1.1" 503 Service Unavailable
----

. To retrieve logs from a previous (terminated) proxy pod, add the `--previous` flag:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+quotes"]
----
$ *oc logs --previous __<proxy_pod_name>__ -n __<mta_namespace>__*
----

[id="llm-proxy-future-logging_{context}"]
== Planned audit logging capabilities

The following capabilities are listed as future enhancements in the LLM proxy design and are not available in the current release:

* Structured JSON log events per completed LLM transaction, including request routing, response latency, and token count metadata.
* User-to-request correlation using anonymised user identifiers.
* Forwarding structured log streams to a SIEM system (such as Splunk or Elasticsearch) using the OpenShift Cluster Logging Operator.

When these features become available, this guide will be updated with configuration procedures.

> For the current release, administrators requiring per-request records should query the PostgreSQL database tables described in xref:llm-proxy-data-handling_{context}[How the LLM proxy handles requests and data].

Author: ```suggestion
```
